# 230213 Lecture 1

---

## Contents
1. Informal intro to ACC
2. A high-level overview
3. Learning objectives
4. Course organisations


## Problems? Algorithms?
- Problem: Given a language, is this within the language?
- Algorithm: a recipe that gives the answer in a number of steps. "Models of computation"


## Models of Computation
- Turing machines
  - Computation steps are expensive


## Course information
- In this course we will discuss different classes of languages, aka problems.
  - Regular languages
  - Context-free languages
  - Decidable languages
  - Recognisable languages


## Regular language
> Regular languages are decided by finite state automata - machines without memory.

- Finite state automata
  - No extra memory to write to
  - Example: traffic lights, automatic doors
- Non-determinism
  - Adding non-determinism to such machines add convenience, but does not add power.
- Pumping lemma
  - For proving that some languages are not regular, such as context-free languages


## Context-free language
> Context-Free languages are much more expressive and decided by push-down automata -
> machines with only a stack for memory.

- Context-free grammars
  - an alternative way to describe context-free languages


## Recognisable languages
> Recognisable languages are even more expressive and recognised by Turing Machines - 
> machines that have a memory tape that can be traversed

- Turing machine
  - Forms the theoretical basis of all our modern machines
  - Anything our machines can do, a Turing Machine can do too.
- Non-determinism
  - simplification
  - no impact on power or expression
- These machines can run into loops, from which they might never escape


## (Un)Decidable languages
> Decidable languages are less expressive and decided by Turing Machine

- Now we make sure our machine never runs into a loop
- Most of the problems we face in the world are in this class
- Undecidable languages
  - Not all problems are decidable (some problems can never be solved by a machine)
- Reductions
  - For proving a problem is decidable
- Mapping
  - For proving a problem is undecidable
- Reductions and Mapping allow us to solve one problem by using a program designed to solve another problem.
- 

## (In)Feasible problems
- Decidable does not mean feasible
- We have to distinguish between feasible and infeasible problems
- Karp reductions
  - For proving (in)feasibility of a problem
  - Allows us to solve one problem by using a program designed to solve another problem


## Learning Objectives
1. Derive whether a problem is computable
2. Design and use a model of computation such as an automaton or a Turing machine
3. Determine the differences between models of computation
4. Explain the difference between the classes P and NP


